Do you have an idea when using HTML code like this
or even with the better adjacent HTML method might not be great? Performance is not an issue here with
this adjacent HTML method and also not that we would lose user input, so that's not the reason.
Well a downside of this approach is that you tell the browser which element to render or which content
to render and that can be any HTML content, doesn't have to be a single element, can be any
as complex as you want HTML code. The downside just is you have no direct access to the newly rendered
content. Let's say you would want to later reach out to this paragraph and change it or you inserted
a button and you want to add an event listener, well then you have to do good old div query selector
and query for a paragraph for example,
in this case, we of course fetch the first one because we have to but you get the point,
this would allow us to get access to this paragraph.
Now the more complex the HTML code is you inserted here, the more complex is to query for the right
things so that you get the objects with which you can work, where you can add event listeners, where you
can change the properties and so on.
So the missing direct access to the inserted elements can be a problem.
Of course it's not if you don't plan on doing anything with the inserted elements in your Javascript
code but as soon as you need to add event listeners or change styles or read some values or do anything
else with them in Javascript,
this approach has the downside of not giving you direct access and if you find yourself inserting content
like this and then querying for it thereafter, you're basically running two steps to get access to a
newly added element when there actually is only one step required and that's the case with create element,
with this other approach of adding new elements. So here I reloaded this page on which we worked all
the time and now let's say here in the unordered list, I want to add a list item at the end on which
we can click. Now for that, just as before we can now get access to the list with document query selector
li, not li, ul like this
and now of course we could use innerHTML or insert adjacent HTML but now I'll do something else.
I now want to create a new element node here in Javascript and then append it at the end of the list
and this can be done with document.createElement. Now you always call create element on the document,
you don't call this on any other DOM node or DOM object,
it's always document.createElement.
This creates a new element, a new DOM object, just like you could select it but it creates it from scratch
and it takes at least one argument here and that's the tag name you want to create, so the tag name of
the element you want to create,
in this case li because we want to create a list item, without the brackets, so without the angled brackets,
just the tag name which you find between the angled brackets, so li here to create a list item element.
In case you're wondering about the second argument here,
we don't need that here,
this is actually an object with exactly one property that is supported, the is property and that is related
to custom elements,
a very advanced topic which we'll not cover here,
this is the form in which you use this pretty much all the time.
So here we create a list item and I could hit enter but then we create it and we just let it go into the
void and it will actually get garbage collect because I'm not saving it anywhere.
It creates a new element and it actually returns it,
so now we can store it in a constant maybe which is maybe named new li, of course the name is up to
you
and this curly brace has to go of course.
So now we have the new li available,
if I output it here,
here it is
but of course if I hover over that, that's not getting highlighted in on the left here because it hasn't
been inserted anywhere
but now we can do that.
Now we can reach out to our list which we got access to earlier and we can insert li here with append
child for example.
This takes any node,
actually you could also pass a text node here but you typically don't create text nodes in Javascript,
you just set text with text content because you rarely want to add a text node next to existing element
nodes,
so therefore it is not really a use case,
so instead here, you use append child and pass in this new li.
If you do that, you'll see this bullet point here
and of course no content next to it
but since we have access to new li, we can now also set text content equal to item 4 for example and
you'll see it up here on the left. Typically of course, you would first finish up configuring this and
set the text content and anything else and then append it instead of first appending it and then completing
it because you only want to append it once you are done configuring it and you can set the text content
and the style prop and so on
even if you haven't added the item to the DOM yet because it's already there in Javascript memory,
you can work with it.
So this is now how we can add it and the big advantage is now that we already have this object now where
we can add event listeners or change the style or do whatever you want,
that is all possible now
thanks to this way of adding it.